Last we talked about the routes.
We did a little bit with the handlers but
didn't really get into it but
we got the routes down,
we got the sub router.
And before we transition into actually
interact with the database and
doing all that cool stuff.
We're gonna learn about middleware.
So, what is middleware?
Middleware are basically a list of
functions that have the ability to
run right before your handlers do,
that's basically it.
They sit in the middle of
your route being called and
the actual handler for
that route actually executing.
They're just different things
that you can do before that,
if you've ever done something on Redux,
you can add all those plugins to Redux.
Those are middleware.
It's things you can add to Redux
before you serialize it into state or
not or whatever, right?
It could be a dev tool.
It can be a persistent state.
It could be a thunk or
something like that.
Another example of middleware,
in front end, will be,
that's probably the only
example I can think of.
It's mostly a back end thing or
network thing.
But yeah,
it's got some pretty good use cases.
So, some use cases are like,
maybe you wanna log the request.
Yeah, that's perfect job for
middleware, you wanna see in your terminal
every time someone hit your request.
Yeah, that's very helpful for
developments.
So you know when a request came in,
what the request was,
how long it took,
maybe you want to handle errors.
Which you have to, because remember,
one server serves all clients.
So if your server crashes,
no one can use your app.
Whereas on your client, if I was using
your app on my browser and it broke,
it wouldn't break for
everyone else in the world.
It would only break on my computer.
But on the server if it broke,
it broke for everybody.
So you want to handle the errors
because it's very important.
So middleware can do that.
Authentication, you wanna prevent
certain people from accessing certain
routes unless they're authorized and
identified to do so.
Middleware is perfect for that.
And pretty much anything else.
You can enhance or
augment the request object.
You can add things to it, transform it.
Do whatever you want.
And you can just keep doing and
you can reuse that stuff.
So what does middleware look like?
It looks exactly like a handler,
where it has a request and
a response, but
it has this other thing called next.
The next function is exactly
what it sounds like.
It tells express that,
I don't know what I typed there.
It tells you express that, we're
basically done here in this middleware.
We did everything that we wanted to do,
so go to the next thing in the stack
which can be another middleware function
or the handler whatever is next.
Each middleware doesn't know what comes
after it cuz you'll see how we can
figure it.
But this just means,
I did what I was supposed to do, I'm done,
go to the next thing in the stack, which
can be a handler or another middleware.
So it's the equivalent of
calling res inside of a handler.
Whereas when I say res.json or
res.send inside of a handler,
I'm done with this work calling next
is the middleware saying, I'm done.
Middleware can also respond
to the request too.
Middleware can say read res and
stop and never called next.
For instance, a use case would
be I have a middleware that
checks to see if an incoming
IP address is from Coca Cola.
And if it is I'm going to, in the request
right now and send a message back and
say, hey, we're Pepsi,
you're Coca Cola get off our website.
You can do that inside of a middleware,
you can stop doing whatever you want.
You can do the same thing a handler
can do, you can talk to the databases.
You can literally do whatever you want and
then you can also continue on to another
middleware that does something else.
Or you put everything in one middleware,
which I don't recommend.
So, all right, I'm making this sound
hard than actually is, let's do it.
So, let's write some middleware.
First we're gonna use some middleware
that we aren't gonna create because it's
super useful.
And then we're gonna
create some middleware.
So some really useful middleware
that we're gonna use.
One of them is called Morgan.
So we're gonna npm install Morgan,
I am just gonna say save.
Morgan is a middleware that logs requests,
that's literally all it does,
and it's super useful.
So we're gonna install Morgan and
then you're gonna go over to server.
And then, above all your route
declarations you could say,
well, first let's import Morgan, I guess,
import morgan from morgan, like so.
And then after we make an app,
we can say app.use.
And remember, order matters.
So we always put your
middleware at the top,
before all your other routes if you want
the routes to come after the middleware.
So middleware usually comes first,
so I'm gonna say app.use morgan and
morgan takes in an option of what
level of logging do you want.
You can do l tiny concise,
I like the dev formatting because it gives
me everything I need as a developer for
logging some of the dev.
And I'm gonna save that.
Right, so, app.use doesn't always have to
take a mount path like we did down here.
You can actually just not put a mount
path and it's global for the whole app.
This means I'm using this middleware for
the entire app.
That means every single request
that comes into this API has
to go through whatever
morgan is doing first.
And I can tell you it's doing
a console log, that's what it's doing.
It's just logging and
then it's calling next.
So then when it calls next,
where does it go?
Well, it goes to the next
thing in a stack.
So in the case of I did an API
call to slash next would be here,
it would go here.
But what if I did an API call
to slash API slash product?
Well, next would be slash API slash
product and it'll run that handler.
So next is always different
depending on what the request is.
That's why this is middleware
doesn't know what next is.
It just calls next and express handles
the routing of what to call next because
again, everything is just basically
in an array underneath everything.
Everything's order is kept in track,
so it knows what to call next.
All right, let's run that and
see what I'm talking about.
So going to stop my server,
start my server.
I'm gonna go here and I'm gonna do
a get request to my API product.
Still got message, hello here,
when I go back to the terminal,
you see I got this log now.
Morgan did that.
It said, so
why did a get request to this URL?
You sent back a 200 response and
it took 1.37 milliseconds.
And I don't know if this is how many
bytes, how big the payload was?
Yeah, that's the size
I sent back 19 bytes.
So it's very useful, you would use
middleware, if you had a product that you
bought, I mean, there's so
many logging products out there.
I don't even wanna name one.
But if you use any logging products,
a logger API,
they would probably have an SDK
that has a middleware that
sits on your express that sends
your logs to their servers.
So, they can show you on a dashboard,
data dog or something like that.
Right, like some logging thing.
It's probably just a middleware or
if you've ever use centri,
it's propably a middleware or
segments for analytics,
probably a middleware because it
just look at any single request.
Any questions on that?
Yes.
>> Do we have any options here like this
particular middleware will intercept only
these routes?
>> Yeah, that's a great question.
So the question was,
do we have the options to say only want
this middleware to intercept these routes?
There's so many ways you can do that.
You can do that on the code
level where inside you just set
the middleware to be global.
And then inside the middleware,
you specifically check against a list of
routes that you specifically want
to do and only run your code there.
That's one way.
The other way is, you can do it
on a configuration level where
you only add the middleware to
the routes that you want it to affect.
So, for instance we added
the middleware globally here but
there's nothing stopping me from
adding middleware here only for this.
Or even further down I can
go into the router and
only want to add middleware here,
for this one, right?
So I can specifically add middleware
wherever I want, that way, or
check myself inside the code.